It's time I believe to address the
elephant in the room, which is aesthetics.
This is the area that
causes all the problems.
This is the point where we get
into design being subjective and
not liking your auntie's curtains.
So how do we deal with this one?
How do we deal with it?
We've done a wire frame, so we've dealt
with a lot of the content issues,
we've dealt a lot with
the structural issues,
page flow, whether people spot key
elements, all of that we've dealt with.
But we need to deal with the aesthetics.
Now, if you're lucky then
the company you're working for
has a brand guidelines all ready in place.
He's all ready made those big
decisions in terms of aesthetics,
in terms of color choices,
typography those kinds of things.
And if that is where you're at,
I highly recommend you do not
fight that battle, right?
You don't try and
change those brand guidelines.
It is a big fight and
you'll get nowhere and anyway,
it's saving you a lot of hustle and
a lot of time.
I know it's hard to work with
a brand identity that maybe
you're not fully invested in or
you don't believe in, but
really you make the most out of the the
constraints that are placed upon you.
And that is the difference between
being a designer and an artist,
that you have to work within constraints.
So if you've got brand guidelines,
really this next bit,
you can kinda largely skip over.
But for the rest of us, we are in
a position where we're faced with having
to establish the aesthetics of a website
and that includes your colors,
your typography,
your styling those kinds of things.
So if you're in that position,
where do you start?
How do you begin to address this?
Well, naturally, I would say would
begin right at the beginning of
the project in your discovery phase.
In that phase, I would suggest
discussing with your client
a set of key words they want to
represent their brand, right?
So, these are words that
are used to help define who
the company is and
what they want to communicate.
So these might be words like we
want to be seen as professional or
friendly or fun or whatever,
a set of words that represents the brand.
So how do you go about
deciding that with the client?
Well there are kind of three
ways that you can go about,
deciding defining the brand and
those key words, with your stakeholders.
And again, this is a great way of
engaging with your stakeholders.
It's a great way of getting them on board.
So this is definitely worth doing.
So your three options are, first of all,
what I called the famous person exercise,
which is a really simple exercise.
It's use ask your various stakeholders
if your brand was a famous person,
who would that famous person be, okay?
And you ask them specifically why,
what is it about that famous person?
So there are certain reoccurring
people that often come up,
Obama is one that is often
mentioned in American companies.
In British companies,
there's a there's a celebrity
called Stephen Fry who
often comes up as well.
And it's not so much the name
of the person that's important.
What's important is what they describe
that famous person is bringing,
they're charismatic, they're articulate,
they're intelligent.
Those are the kinds of
words that basically
you can use to discuss the brand identity.
Now that's great and from doing that
exercise you will get words that
are descriptive of
personality unsurprisingly.
But sometimes it's useful to get words
that are more design focused words.
So if you want to go down that route,
another exercise you can run is
the reception room exercise, where
you're asked participants to describe
a reception area for their company.
What it would look like in their
idealized view of it, right?
So they would get them to describe
things like the furniture, the deck or
what musics playing, what's on the walls?
Is there someone to greet them, what that
person's like, how they they approach you,
all of those kinds of characteristics,
right?
And they will use a lot of adjectives.
They will say things like minimalistic
furniture or colorful wallpaper or
things like that.
So write down those words like
colorful minimalistic and
those can act as brand keywords again.
Now, the final way of doing
it is to use a brand deck.
So there is actually a website that
I've got linked to in the slides.
Cool brand cards and basically you can
either buy a set physical cards or
you can do this online and the cards
have got lots of different words.
And you can get stakeholders to pick
different words to kind of help
identify what your brand is going
to be and how you represent it.
Really, which of these methods you
use is somewhat abstract, right?
Is somewhat up to you and
the particular route that you want to go,
there is no right or
wrong way of doing it.
The key however,
is to end up with a set of words that
you want the design to represent, and
everybody is bought into the design
needs to represent these keywords.
So what that does is it
sets a standard by which to
confirm whether the design is succeeded or
failed.
Rather than it being open to
people's feelings about it.
We've now got a tangible
thing that we can measure.
Now if you want more information about
these different methods and working,
I have written an article on building
a brand using the web that you might
find useful you might
want to check that out.
So again that's in the slides.
So once you've got this set of words,
now we need to start kind
of interpreting those words I'm
in some kind of visual form.
And actually one of the great tools that
a lot of designers using this regard is
something called style times.
Instead of designing a whole website,
where you might get it wrong or
you might have the wrong feel or whatever
else, you just produce these mood boards.
Basically, which have got examples of
typography examples of color imagery that
represent whatever those key words are or
whatever those brand words are.
And you'll probably do a lot of these for
different brand words, for
different combinations of brand
words in order to experiment.
They're very quick and easy to create.
You literally open up,
you can do it in PowerPoint,
if you want to do it whatever you want.
You just dump in fonts and
colors and that kind of thing.
And actually, if you really want
to engage with your stakeholders,
and give them a sense of
ownership over the design,
then this is a great
opportunity to do that.
Remember that the reason we want people to
feel a sense of ownership is if they feel
that they were involved
in creating the design,
then they're less likely to reject
it because it's their own work.
And they're also more likely
to defend it to others.
We also wanna involve
the stakeholders at this stage.
Because a game was showing
them the design evolving,
we've shown them some wireframes.
We've shown them the style tiles, and
then they'll see the final design and
it won't come as a surprise, okay?
And remember surprises are bad.
So whether you wanna do it yourself or
whether you wanna get your stakeholders
involved, basically what you're doing is,
going to Google Images and
typing in that particular brand word.
So you wanted the design to feel calming.
So you typed the word calming
into Google Images and
see what images it comes out up with.
And then you grab the ones you like,
and you sell them in your style title,
simple as that.
You could use a site called Pickler,
I think that's how you say it,
which is great for
finding colors that are associated
with different images or feelings.
So you can go to that website link in
the slide deck and you can type in
a particular keyword and it will
suggest colors based on that keyword.
Brilliant., great, so
you've now got a color inspiration.
You can drop that into your style tiles.
And then there's photography,
that's a photography typography even,
right where you can go to Google fonts and
you can pick some fonts that you feel
kind of represent those different
feelings that you're going for.
And then if you want some
stylistic inspiration,
you go to a site like Dribble, and
you search on your keywords there and
see what it comes back with and
maybe pick and choose.
So you'll end up creating these
different style tiles with these
different combinations,
either yourself as a designer or
ideally with some of your stakeholders.
So once you've got the style tiles
the next stage is to work out which of
these is gonna be most appropriate, right?
Now, there are many different
approaches that you could do here.
But my preference is or
what the ultimate aim is that you're
seeking to show your stakeholders that
there is hard evidence supporting
your approach rather than it just being
based on your opinion as a designer.
So we want some testing
again at this point, but
again, we want to keep it very,
very lightweight.
So how would you go about testing
style tiles or indeed any aesthetic
approach you might do a final design
mock up and want to use this as well?
This is where there is
a technique called a semantic
differential survey,
which I mentioned earlier.
And there are kind of
different ways you can do it.
But, basically what you're doing is
you're testing the aesthetics with your
target audience to see what they think.
And it's done as a survey, right?
And you could do this and styled tiles or
final design comps or
both, if you want to.
The way that this survey is worded can
vary, but the basic approach is the same.
In approach number one,
what you'll do is you'll show your
target audience the design, okay?
And then you'll ask them to rate their
impression of the design on a scale.
So let's say what would the brand word
you want to represent is cashew, right?
So you'd have a one to five scale with
casual at one end formula at the other,
right?
So another one might be
simple to complex or fun,
too serious, and
they rate it on that scale.
And if it obviously rates towards casual,
which is the brand words you want,
you know your style toe or your design
is heading in the right direction.
You're good to go without having
to say the dreaded words,
what do you think do your stakeholders,
right?
You've got hard data instead.
Now, if that doesn't appeal to you,
there is another method, right?
If you're sliding scale is potentially,
some keywords don't work on
a sliding scale, because they
don't have an opposite to them.
So if you're in that kind of situation
then you show the style tile and
you ask them to pick from
a whole selection of words which
ones they feel best represent the brand.
And that list of words would be,
your brand keywords,
would be their opposites,
if they've got opposites.
And then throw in some other random
keywords cuz sometimes somebody will come
back and go,
I feel that design looks a bit cold.
All right, so I'm gonna put the word
cold in and see if anyone selects it.
So that's another way of doing it.
And then the final way of doing it is
if it's a very competitive market, and
people wanna compare
themselves to the competition.
Or alternatively, if you've got lots of
style tiles and you wanna compare them
against one another, you can ask
the questions which of the following
sites looks most approachable or
calming or whatever your keyword is.
And then they select
from a series of options.
But basically it's the same thing.
What we're trying to prove is
that are designed matches our
brand keywords, all right,
to provide us with evidence so
that this isn't going to
become a semantic discussion.
Now again,
all of those tests can be done with
usability hub that I mentioned earlier.
There's also another tool called
maze which can be used for this.
Again, it's very quick to set up,
and to run the test and
you can get results back in under an hour.
The only thing that makes this
slightly more trickier than
the earlier example I gave of wire
frames is that you've got to,
in this particular case have
the right target audience, right?
So when it comes to usability and
find ability,
unless your audience is has got some kind
of cognitive or physical disability,
maybe they're more old or
maybe they're very young.
Basically most of us will struggle
with the same things when it comes to
usability.
However, we will all have
radically different opinions about
design aesthetics, right?
And so you do need the right target
audience when it comes to the aesthetic
side of things.
Now again,
usability hub will help recruit people for
you, if that's what you need here.
But ,to be honest most of the time,
I used to just use a mailing list, or
used your social media followers,
or something like that,
to reach out to your target audience.
And once you've got those style tiles and
once you know your style
tiles are all right with your
target audience then really,
its just a matter bringing
it all together, right?
It's a matter of bringing
those wireframes together, and
bringing the aesthetic style tiles
together, into a final design.
And by this stage,
it should be fairly straight forward.
Because the stakeholders have
been involved in the creation of
the style tiles and the wireframes they've
seen and been engaged with that process.
You've done testing to provide
evidence around those things.
So you're going to be in a really strong
position to produce the final design.